Add a guide for multiple languages support (#191)
eclipse-langium/langium-website: hugo/content/guides/multiple-languages.md

---
title: "Multiple dependent languages"
weight: 400
---

This tutorial is about integrating multiple dependent languages in one Langium project.

One common situation were it makes sense to create dependent languages is when you only want to read concepts in one language and predefine them in another file (probably also a built-in one). Think of splitting SQL into a defining `CREATE TABLE table (...)`) and a reading part (`SELECT * FROM table`).

> Note, that for n independent languages can be simply made by creating n independent Langium projects.

## Our plan

The entire change touches several files. Let's summarize what needs to be done:

1. the **grammar** (the `*.langium` file) needs to be split into the three parts that were discussed above

> 2. the **Langium configuration** (the `langium-config.json` file in the Langium project root) needs to split the language configuration into thre new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. the **Langium configuration** (the `langium-config.json` file in the Langium project root) needs to split the language configuration into three parts
```

> 3. the **`Djinject` module** of your language (`XXX-module.ts`) needs to create the new language services as well.

Reviewer: Are we already using Djinject in the current Langium version?

Author: I will call it `module file`

4. Last, but not least, you have to **cleanup all dependent files**. Here we can give general hints.
5. if you have a **VSCode extension**
    1. the `package.json` needs to be adapted
    2. the extension entry point file (`src/extension/main.ts`) needs to be changed slightly

## Our scenario

> To keep this guide easy, I will use the `hello-world` project.

Reviewer: Maybe worth to add a link to the "Getting Started" documentation here since it explains the hello-world project.

Author: Done

> Let’s imagine to have three languages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s imagine that we have three languages:
```

* the first language **defines** persons
* the second language **greets** persons of the first language

> * the third language **configures** which person you are+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the third language **configures** which person you are
```

Just as a finger practice, let's require that you cannot greet yourself.

{{<mermaid>}}
flowchart
    Implementation -->|requires| Definition
    Configuration -->|requires| Definition
    Implementation -->|requires| Configuration
{{</mermaid>}}

## Let's start!

### Grammar

The most relevant change might be in the grammar. Here is the original grammar from the `hello-world` example, which is generated by Langium's Yeoman generator:

```langium
grammar MultipleLanguages

entry Model:
    (persons+=Person | greetings+=Greeting)*;

Person:
    'person' name=ID;

Greeting:
    'Hello' person=[Person:ID] '!';

hidden terminal WS: /\s+/;
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/;
terminal INT returns number: /[0-9]+/;
terminal STRING: /"(\\.|[^"\\])*"|'(\\.|[^'\\])*'/;

hidden terminal ML_COMMENT: /\/\*[\s\S]*?\*\//;
hidden terminal SL_COMMENT: /\/\/[^\n\r]*/; 
```

> Now, split it into three new files (let's call them units):

Reviewer: Should we suggest names for the `.langium` files here?

Our definition grammar:
```langium
grammar MultiDefinition

entry DefinitionUnit:
    (persons+=Person)*;

Person:
    'person' name=ID;

hidden terminal WS: /\s+/;
terminal ID: /[_a-zA-Z][\w_]*/;

hidden terminal ML_COMMENT: /\/\*[\s\S]*?\*\//;
hidden terminal SL_COMMENT: /\/\/[^\n\r]*/;
```

Our configuration grammar (note the import):
```langium
grammar MultiConfiguration

import "multiple-languages-definition";

entry ConfigurationUnit: 'I' 'am' who=[Person:ID] '.';
```

> Our implementation grammar (note the imports again):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our implementation grammar (note the import again):
```

For the next step you need to run the Langium generator once:

```sh
npm run langium:generate
```

### `Djinject` language module

The `Djinject` module describes how your language services are built.
After adding two more languages, some important classes get generated - which need to be registered properly.

1. Open the module file (`/src/language/multiple-languages-module.ts`).
2. You will notice a wrong import (which is ok, we renamed it in the previous steps and derived new classes by code generation).
3. Import the new generated modules instead.
   Replace this line:
   ```ts
   import { 
     MultipleLanguagesGeneratedModule, 
     MultipleLanguagesGeneratedSharedModule
   } from './generated/module.js';
   ```
   with the following:
   ```ts
   import {
     MultiConfigurationGeneratedModule,
     MultiDefinitionGeneratedModule,
     MultiImplementationGeneratedModule,
     MultipleLanguagesGeneratedSharedModule
   } from './generated/module.js';
   ```

> 4. In the function `createMultipleLanguagesServices` you will notice an error line now, because we deleted the old class name by the previous step. The code there needs basically be tripled. But before we do this, we need to define the new output type of `createMultipleLanguagesServices`. In the end this should lead to this definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the function `createMultipleLanguagesServices` you will notice an error line now, because we deleted the old class name in the previous step. The code there needs to basically be tripled. But before we do this, we need to define the new output type of `createMultipleLanguagesServices`. In the end this should lead to this definition:
```

        );
        const Implementation = inject(
            createDefaultModule({ shared }),
            MultiImplementationGeneratedModule,
            MultipleLanguagesModule
        );
        shared.ServiceRegistry.register(Configuration);
        shared.ServiceRegistry.register(Definition);
        shared.ServiceRegistry.register(Implementation);
        registerValidationChecks(Configuration);
        registerValidationChecks(Definition);
        registerValidationChecks(Implementation);
        return { shared, Configuration, Definition, Implementation };
    }
    ```

After this step, Langium is set up correctly. But if you try to build now, the compiler will throw you some errors, because the old concepts of the AST are not existing anymore.

> Be aware of the fact that we are using `MultipleLanguagesModule` in all three services, three independent services! If you want to avoid this (because of duplicated state etc.), you should put some work into creating instances for each service.

### Cleanup

Let's clean up the error lines. Here are some general hints:

* keep in mind, that you are dealing with three file types now, namely `*.me`, `*.who` and `*.hello`

>     * you can distinguish them very easy by selecting the right sub service from the result object of `createMultipleLanguagesServices`, which is either `Configuration`, `Definition` or `Implementation`, but not `shared`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * you can distinguish them very easily by selecting the right sub service from the result object of `createMultipleLanguagesServices`, which is either `Configuration`, `Definition` or `Implementation`, but not `shared`
```

    * all these services have a sub service with file extensions: `[Configuration,Definition,...].LanguageMetaData.fileExtensions: string[]`
    * so, when you are obtaining any documents from the `DocumentBuilder` you can be sure that they are parsed by the matching language service
    * to distinguish them on your own, use the AST functions for determining the root type, for example for the Configuration language use `isConfigurationUnit(document.parseResult.value)`

### VSCode extension

If you have a VSCode extension, you need to touch two files: `package.json` and `src/extension/main.ts`.

#### File `package.json`

> In this file we define, what services this extension will contribute to VSCode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this file we define what services this extension will contribute to VSCode.
```

Before the change only one language and grammar was defined:

```js
//...
"contributes": {
    "languages": [
        {
            "id": "multiple-languages",
            "aliases": [
                "Multiple Languages",
                "multiple-languages"
            ],
            "extensions": [".hello"],
            "configuration": "./language-configuration.json"
        }
    ],
    "grammars": [
        {
            "language": "multiple-languages",
            "scopeName": "source.multiple-languages",
            "path": "./syntaxes/multiple-languages.tmLanguage.json"
        }
    ]
},
//...
```

> After the change, we tripled the information. Be aware of that the language ids must match the ids from the Langium configuration. Also make sure that the paths th the syntax files and the language configuration are correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the change, we tripled the information. Be aware of that the language ids must match the ids from the Langium configuration. Also make sure that the paths to the syntax files and the language configuration are correct.
```

context.subscriptions.push(fileSystemWatcher);

// Options to control the language client
const clientOptions: LanguageClientOptions = {
    documentSelector: [{ scheme: 'file', language: 'multiple-languages' }],
    synchronize: {
        // Notify the server about file changes to files contained in the workspace
        fileEvents: fileSystemWatcher
    }
};
```

After the change, it should look like this (the language IDs should be the same as they are in the Langium configuration):

```ts
const fileSystemWatcher = vscode.workspace.createFileSystemWatcher('**/*.(me|who|hello)');
context.subscriptions.push(fileSystemWatcher);

// Options to control the language client
const clientOptions: LanguageClientOptions = {
    documentSelector: [
        { scheme: 'file', language: 'multiple-languages-configuration' },
        { scheme: 'file', language: 'multiple-languages-definition' },
        { scheme: 'file', language: 'multiple-languages-implementation' }
    ],
    synchronize: {
        // Notify the server about file changes to files contained in the workspace
        fileEvents: fileSystemWatcher
    }
};
```

> > Be aware of that the file extensions can change over time, depending on your needs. You should actually use the `LanguageMetaData` of each language service. I have chosen the given implementation because of simplicity. You can do it better!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Be aware that the file extensions can change over time, depending on your needs. You should actually use the `LanguageMetaData` of each language service. I have chosen the given implementation because of simplicity. You can do it better!
```

## Test the extension!

Now everything should be executable. **Do not forget to build**!

Let's run the extension and create some files in our workspace:

### Definition `people.who`

```
person Markus
person Michael
person Frank
```

### Configuration `thats.me`

```
I am Markus.
```

### Implementation `greetings.hello`

```
Hello Markus!
Hello Michael!
```

## Checklist

You should be able now...:
* to see proper syntax highlighting
* to trigger auto completion for keywords

> * to jump to the definitin by Cmd/Ctrl-clicking on a person's name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* to jump to the definition by Cmd/Ctrl-clicking on a person's name
```

# Add a validator (task)

As promised, let's add a simple validation rule, that you cannot greet yourself. Therefore we enter our name in the `thats.me` file like we did in the previous step.

Try to include the follwing code to our validator. This is meant as task, try to find the missing pieces on your own :-).

```ts
checkNotGreetingYourself(greeting: Greeting, accept: ValidationAcceptor): void {
    const document = getDocument(greeting);
    const configFilePath = join(document.uri.fsPath, '..', 'thats.me');
    const configDocument = this.documents.getOrCreateDocument(URI.file(configFilePath));
    if (greeting.person.ref) {
        if (configDocument && isConfigurationUnit(configDocument.parseResult.value)) {
            if(configDocument.parseResult.value.who.ref === greeting.person.ref) {
                accept('warning', 'You cannot greet yourself 🙄!', { node: greeting, property: 'person' });
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> After doing so, your name should be have a warning, stating that you cannot greet yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After doing so, your name should display a warning, stating that you cannot greet yourself.
```

# Troubleshooting

In this section we will list common mistakes.

* One prominent mistake is forgetting to build Langium and Typescript files, before running the extension.

> * Since we are basically just copy-pasting given configuration, be aware what you are pasting. Make sure that the code still makes sense after copying. Probably you forgot to adapt the pasted code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Since we are basically just copy-pasting given configuration, be aware of what you are pasting. Make sure that the code still makes sense after copying. You probably forgot to adapt the pasted code.
```

            ],
            "extensions": [".who"],
            "configuration": "./language-configuration.json"
        }, {
            "id": "multiple-languages-implementation",
            "aliases": [
                "Multiple Languages Implementation",
                "multiple-languages-implementation"
            ],
            "extensions": [".hello"],
            "configuration": "./language-configuration.json"
        }
    ],
    "grammars": [
        {
            "language": "multiple-languages-configuration",
            "scopeName": "source.multiple-languages-configuration",
            "path": "./syntaxes/multiple-languages-configuration.tmLanguage.json"
        },
        {
            "language": "multiple-languages-definition",
            "scopeName": "source.multiple-languages-definition",
            "path": "./syntaxes/multiple-languages-definition.tmLanguage.json"
        },
        {
            "language": "multiple-languages-implementation",
            "scopeName": "source.multiple-languages-implementation",
            "path": "./syntaxes/multiple-languages-implementation.tmLanguage.json"
        }
    ]
},  
```

#### File `src/extension/main.ts`

> And here is the extension file and how the file watcher in it worked before the change:

Reviewer 2: After https://github.com/eclipse-langium/langium/pull/1286, we won't need to define any file system watcher in the client. We should also check for other parts of the documentation where this needs to be updated.

Author: I removed the part about the file watcher. The remaining parts look ok to me.
